What is the brain gut connection? So
surprisingly it was never really
identified as the brain gut connection.
All these systems in the gut are
interconnected with each other. So the
gut is is is like a brain. Within the
gut we have the immune system and the
microbes also live in the gut and the
nervous system in the gut. They all
communicate with each other all the
time. Why haven't we evolved to do
without microbes in our gut? Every
organism today from the cockroach to the
butterfly to humans has a microbiome. A
gut microbiome. Whoa. We think that like
we're in charge. Yeah. But we're an Uber
ride. That's what we are.
[Music]
This is Star Talk special edition, which
means I got Gary O'Reilly. Gary. Hey
Neil, how you doing man? I'm good.
Chuck, always good to have you man. Good
to be here. Of course. All right. Today,
yeah, I'm I'm checking out the this
subject. I love it. Okay. All right. The
gut brain connection. Ah, some people's
brains are gut.
Oh, we went philosophical straight away.
So, Gary, tell us why. What's going on
in this episode? Okay, so we've had
everybody for our lives tell us they've
had a gut feeling about something. Gut
feeling. Yeah. And then we've seen
people under stress dive. They don't
say, "I have a brain feeling." No, this
is exactly it. And we've seen people who
are under stress dive into the fridge.
We've seen people who are depressed not
want to eat at all. And then we kind of
work out that our guts are not
standalone systems within our body,
right? That there is actually a direct
gut brain connection.
So that gut feeling may actually be a
fact, not a fictional imagination of
somebody. Now imagine, just imagine
this, that every emotion you have has a
mirror image within your gut. Oh, that
makes sense. Right now, they call it
hangry, don't they? Don't they just? I'm
hangry. I'm hangry. And here, spoiler
pun coming. Uh, that is obviously our
food for thought. And now it's our time
for an expert.
And now I'm hungry. There you go. I see
what you did there. Okay, we have with
us here in New York City, uh, visiting
us at the Hayden Planetarium right here
in my office, a gentleman based at UCLA.
We have Emaran Meyer. Yes, I think I
said your name correctly. You're a
medical doctor at UCLA. You're a
gastroenterenterologist, which is a lot
of syllables to say you're a gut man. I
think we like that. But am I correct? A
scrabble winner. You're also a
neuroscientist. You hardly ever see
those two in the same phrase because
your brain and the gut. Well, more
increasingly you do now. Maybe. So, all
right. And you're also an author. And
the books I got them here. Very very
simple. It's just mind and gut. Mind gut
connection. Mind gut connection. That
was in 2016 with Harper Collins. And
then mind gut and you added a word
immune connection. Immune connection. So
the mind gut is taking over the the body
here. Yeah. All right. We'll see where
that can take us. And so my notes here
say you're also a documentary filmmaker.
What what what's up with that? Yeah. I
almost um didn't go into medical school
because I was fortunate. Um a retired
businessman invited me several times to
accompany him as a sound assistant to
places in New Guinea and um on the
Orinino River to the Yanomami um Indians
and very formative experiences and wow
the nice thing is I can now reconnect
back. I mean I was just a you know first
year medical student had no idea about
any any of the things I know today.
These people that we visited and and and
lived with the Yanomami are very
interesting group of people that have
the the healthiest microbiome on the
planet. So really found out that and and
and how they poop three times a day. I
was going to well that's what I was
that's where I was getting. I was like
how exactly did we determine that that
they have the healthiest body? Are you
digging into their poop in the forest?
So there was a scientist Gloria
Dominguez married to a very famous
gastroenterologist and researcher and
they had the interest in in studying the
microbes of um of peoples around the
world with what they call the vanishing
microbe. You know we're losing microbes
or so they went to the Yanomami and did
the most elaborate analysis. didn't do
it there. Obviously took the samples and
um it turned out that this microbial
system that these people had is the most
diverse and richest of anybody. They
must have thought you were crazy. Can
Can I have some of your poop from my lab
back? I don't know. I know some places
in New York where you get charged extra
for that.
So, just to finish your your resume
here. So you're a professor in the
departments of medicine, physiology and
psychiatry. So that's an evidence of
your your breadth and what you brought
together for your studies and it's and
it's guided me. So my career has led me
down this path at starting in the gut
and then always having an interest in
the brain and the nervous system and at
some point they said it was necessary to
you know connect to these other
departments and that's at the David
Geffin School of Medicine at UCLA. Let's
just get this started. Mhm. What is the
brain gut connection? And if I
understand the timeline correctly,
nobody was really talking about this
until your books came out. Oh, really?
So, so you wrote the book. You're a
pioneer on the brain connection. It was
it was a surprise to me because I've
struggled in my professional career for
literally decades to get this concept of
brain gut connections accepted as a
major factor not just as an
epiphenomenon but as a major disease
factor in like inflammatory bowel
disease and irritable bowel syndrome.
Many of these what we call functional
gastrointestinal the IBS I guess. You
hear it all the time now. Yeah. on TV
commercials and um so it was like was
kind of amazing that enthusiasm that
gradually developed after the book. Not
the first year was not really popular
the first year but then gradually it
picked up and now if you go on on go
online I mean every second word is gut
health and bra you hear about it all the
time now in in more of a cursory fashion
you know there's not a lot of in-depth
talk about it but what is your gut?
Well, I mean the gut I would say is the
after the brain the most complex organ
we have in the body. Okay. It's not just
a digest. It's a tube from the you know
from the mouse to to the anus. And for a
long time digestion and uh absorption
and storage of waste has been sort of
the main focus of of of interest. In the
meantime we know that you know 70% of
our immune system is embedded in the
gut. Big portion of our hor hormonal
system endocrine system is embedded in
the gut. There's a a separate nervous
system in the gut which called been the
little brain. Mike Gerson here from New
York, Colombia sort of been a pioneer in
in uh describing and popularizing that
concept. Wait, wait, so some people
literally have their brain in their ass.
Is this what you're saying? But if you
Yes, I know we probably don't know the
same person, but we know they're like
that. Yeah. Yeah. But but to sort of
ramp up this the answer, all these
systems in the gut are interconnected
with each other. Okay. So the gut is is
is like a brain. So who's talking to who
is the brain talking to the gut or is
the gut talking to the brain? No. First
within the gut we have the immune system
and the um you know the microbes also
live in the gut and the nervous system
in the gut. They all communicate with
each other all the time. So you don't
know it. You know right now if if I
could look inside of you with the right
lens you know I would see all these
things interacting and talking to each
other. Then you add the brain to it. Um
and it's the same thing. There's a a
birectional communication going on 24/7
even when you sleep always anything that
happens at the brain level said earlier
has a mirror image in the gut which we
don't see. You see it on your face. So
if you're angry I can see it on your
face. We can see that the gut
contracting when you're angry, but also
a lot of things that go on in in in the
gut generate emotional feelings or um
most of it 95% doesn't become conscious.
So that that's the thing about the So we
have receptors and transmitters. I can
say it but what are they? How are they
activated? How are they working? And I'm
obviously not emailing each other. But
and just to clarify, when you said it's
not conscious, it means if I understand
that, it means you will have a feeling
and you won't know why, but you'll then
act on that feeling. And if it's your
mind gut connection controlling it, it
means you have behavior that's being
commanded to you by microbes that you
need a microscope to see. Yeah. But what
I want to say for a lot of people,
they're not aware of this, you know,
they're very oblivious to the to their
body. They just have urges, right? Yeah.
Yeah. But but like a sensation that that
everybody knows is uh satiation, hunger
and satiation. Absolutely. So these are
the most basic gut feelings that people
have. And it's so funny you say that.
When I was younger, my mother used to
say I would eat and then I'd say, "I'm
still hungry." And she would say, "Just
wait 10 minutes and your stomach will
talk to your brain and let it know that
you're not hungry. We'll catch up with
the Yeah, your brain will catch up with
your stomach." And I don't think I don't
know where she got that from, but damn
if that's not the case. Yeah. A lot of
people have lost that that mechanism,
you know, like a big part about obesity
is that that that signal that comes from
the gut, this GLP1, this molecule that
everybody talks about, everybody talks
about is produced in cells in the gut
and goes to the your hypothalamus in in
your brain and tells your brain to stop
eating because you're full. A lot of
people have lost that that mechanism,
that feedback. Um why that is, but it's
not clear. But so what do you now do
with mega doses of this hormone, right?
100 times higher than what your gut
produces. These are the GLP-1 injections
that everybody sees on TV now, right? So
that that gives you that sensation. But
you know, in a in a GLP1, excuse me, got
a pharmacist sitting here among us. We
can't help it. It's on every TV
channel. That's true. And by the way,
how do you think I lost 20 pounds? So
you're saying so this I didn't know
this. So this chemical that we see
advertised a 100 times a day. Yeah. Is
that molecule but heightened to create
this sensation that really your body
should have been producing all along.
Yeah. Uh it does a lot of other things.
We we don't know many of them because
now all of a sudden you know it seems to
be effective in substance use disorders.
People who take it find that their urged
to drink. So people who have an alcohol
abuse problem they stop abusing alcohol.
They're like, "Yeah, I just didn't want
to drink or you know." So, and you know,
it's it's kind of ironic when I first
came to LA as a as a research student. I
I studied that that that hormone, you
know, and also it's
sibling called GIP that that there's
another medication that has that. And at
the time, we didn't know. We were just
excited to find all these substances in
the gut, but nobody had a clue what they
do. It it took really literally 35 years
or 40 years before. So, I know you got a
bunch of questions here, but I want to
establish something. How was this
received when you emerged with this idea
that your brain and your gut are
connected in ways no one understood
previously? Because, as I understand
medical school, you study the brain, you
study the brain, you study the gut, you
study the gut, and there's a siloing of
the body where we are just bits and
pieces assembled into one thing.
Absolutely. And the idea that there's a
connection will require that somebody in
that mix has interest in more than one
aspect of the human physiology. Yeah.
And I I would say, you know, I've had a
long-standing interest in college on in
psychology and you know read all the
stuff Yungian stuff and uh so I I came
into medical school already with this
background in you know in in in brain
science with a perspective. Yeah. Yeah.
with the perspective and I would
actually say that the main reason I
ended up in medical school I I thought I
was going to go into psychiatry because
I but then spending a month in a
psychiatry rotation convinced me this is
not what I want to do
those people are okay never mind okay I
might do it today I might do it today
because psychiatry has moved on a lot
really has yeah but I had a very
open-minded um a very charismatic uh
mentor who really supported me in you
know from the beginning. Yeah. So he was
interested in isolating all these
molecules like the GLP1 not necessarily
on the brain and I said can we combine
this you know with with the brain and he
was very open-minded um unusual and but
most of my colleagues either ignored it
didn't find that interesting or then
there were like in the IBS field for
example there there were like really
entrenched interests of people that say
IBS is a gut disorder right forget about
the brain you know And which is so
counterintuitive from the fact that when
we're all kids, we learn that the
hipbone is connected to it's as simple
as that. All the bones are connected to
like you would think that it would be
just you know the gut bone connected to
the brain. It would make perfect sense,
right? It's the first thing we learn
when we learn anatomy
day
one. So, but but it goes further than
that. I I think you know med western
medicine very successful obviously in
many aspects but it is based on a
reductionistic view of the body not an
interconnected not a systems biological
and it's gradually changing from the
there's a couple of developments like
there's an entity now called functional
medicine non-scientific entity but also
in science there's more and more
scientists that think in system
interconnectivity between the systems so
it It'll it will take another 10 years,
I think, and then it will it will
change. I mean, they'll catch up with
you.
How about that? We spoke about GOP1, but
you've got cortisol and serotonin. Yes.
The stress. I suppose we love eating. We
have an experience when we eat certain
foods that maybe you'll tell me yes or
no with serotonin being released in the
gut or dopamine. And then the cult, like
I say, you're diving into the fridge
because you're under stress and you're
going for the sugars or the fats or
whatever it is. I mean, how long did it
take us to work all of that out? And and
and we've got this image of the person
who just broke up. Yeah. With their
their loved one, a gallon of ice cream,
watching a a sad movie crying. What's up
with that? That's what sad movies do.
The gut likes Hogenas ice cream or any
other ice cream. Yeah. So, so,
so there's some very smart people that
worked in this area. So, surprisingly,
it was never really identified as the
brain gut connection. You know, they
always talked about appetite and uh
stress and substance use disorders, but
but it never really became sort of an
essential part of but but that's really
how it started. You know, we knew these
things for for quite some time. very
good scientific studies support it but
but it's not really become a specialty
you know it's because of this dominant
paradigm I think it's not
so going back to Chuck's uh insight into
anatomy
that the kneebone is connected to
several other things in connected to the
brain bone so how how is the gut
connected a to the autonomic system and
then the vagus nerve spelled with an a
not an e and what does the vagus nerve
do because we've heard about it I
couldn't tell you actually where it is
in the body but it's right
Yeah, the Vegas nerve. Okay. Above your
clavicle where your neck is and it runs
down. Why are you telling me this and
not the the the good doctor? All right,
doc. Tell us where where's the Vegas
nerve?
Where you said exactly?
Yeah. So, the Vegas nerve, first of all,
it's a it's a birectional pathway. You
know, it's like a birectional freeway.
Okay. most of the traffic goes from the
gut to the brain to the brain stem and
then to higher emotional centers and 10%
goes the other way. Um so for example to
stimulate your the acid production in
your stomach that's a veagal phenomenon
that's why people used to do cut the
vagus nerve for ulcer disease. This was
a dominant Wow. Wow. Which which is
amazing when you think about this is
only like 30 years ago that we have
absolutely no understanding. Cutting off
your foot because you have an ingrown
toenail. Exactly. That's insane. Wait.
So where where on your body is the vagus
nerve? It goes down from your brain
stem. Okay. Down your neck. Um, just
like that sounds like just what Chuck
Knight said. And then did Chuck say that
90 seconds ago?
Just tells you not. Okay. So, but but
what's important is to realize so the
Vegas nerve has branches to all your
organs. It monitors every organ function
seven 24/7. The ones to the gut have
received a lot of attention because we
were always wondering why is 90% of the
traffic going from the gut to the brain.
There's not that much happening that the
brain needs to know. So now we know
there's all these receptors on the vagus
nerve for serotonin for for these for
GLP1 for the GIP. So
disproportionate what we call afrant or
sensory signal to the brain is related
to this complexity that goes on in and
and in in the gut and the signals it
gets from the microbes. It's a
processing hub. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm still
confused. How does any of that relate to
your immune system? So the immune system
I told you more than 70% is located in
the gut. Sandwiched between the layers
seven zeros 70 zero. Wow. Sandwiched
between the layers of the gut and in
very close communication to the microbes
in the gut. Microns away you know. So
how nature could engineer something like
that. That's potentially deadly
influence of micro. So a micron is a
millionth of an inch. I mean a millionth
of a of a meter I guess of a meter.
Right. So that would be a thousandth of
a millimeter. Yeah. would be a micron.
Yeah. Yeah. So the immune system is very
close to the vagus. Some of these sensor
nerves go into the into this immune
system in the gut and they pick up
signals that that the immune system
produces like cytoines for example best
studied and that has all kinds of
effects on your behavior you know like
cytoines um fatigue chronic pain
some oh yeah I well I got to come at so
pause
then what is the urge that people have
to what do you do the when they clean
out the colon uh a cleanse cleanse this
is urge to get it all out oh I'm gonna I
can answer that for a doctor and or
people prepping for a colonoscopy
they're cleaning everything out so all
these microbes that set up shop to
communicate with the brain they just
flow out your body just for the benefit
of one of your colleagues to look up
your butt okay and so are we destroying
this hard-earned ed microbiome every
time we get ready. Um, oh, Chuck had an
answer. What's your answer, Dr. Chuck?
Okay, so here's my answer. Uh, for the
cleanse, that's So, that's the
first human but yeah. No, no, I'm
saying the actual cleanse itself. I
mean, I know it's supposed to get rid of
your stuff. That was a joke. Oh, I'm
sorry. Wasn't that a good joke? Oh, I
thought you were saying it like Okay,
never mind. You said it's No,
you said no. You said no, it's human
See, we missed the No, cuz I would
have laughed at that cuz that's funny.
Excuse me. I'm sorry. I missed. But the
colonoscopy that's so that they can look
at your intestinal lining and the good
stuff that's that you need is in the
walls of your intestinal lining. So
cleaning that out so they can look at
it, you're not getting rid of. So Okay.
Yeah. So two answers from my side. The
first one I would contradict what you
said because oh you think it's real. So
well you know aruveetic medicine for
thousands of years has propagated these
these these colonic cleanses. All right.
So what is the what is the benefit?
Let's because everything I read says
that the benefits are negligible at the
best. Okay. Unless wait that would be
health benefits but suppose you just
feel better. Doesn't that count? I mean
you know doesn't that we talking about
how you feel better when I punch a
puppy? Does that make it I'm sorry. Did
I say that out loud? Okay. Yes. Anyway,
tell me tell me why it's
good before I get arrested. So, so for a
long time, this has been dominated or
driven or motivated by this concept of
cleansing. So, humans are obsessed with
cleansing. You know, they they they
spend a lot of money on on cleansing.
So, not just cleansing the colon, but a
cleansing diet and in not 19th century
Europe, but in modern times. Yes.
Cleansing. But it's become very popular
again. Talking about your ancestors. I
know. I need I need to dig.
take a bath once a year and only if
necessary. Yeah, but it's our birthday.
You got to celebrate.
Okay. So, so with with microbiome
science, um there's a certain potential
explanation why people have been doing
this over thousands of years. Why? Well,
because it reestablishes a a balance
within, you know, within your colonic
microbiome. Okay. has not been studied
scientifically, but it's certainly
you're saying it's feasible though. So
even though it's not even though we
don't have empirical scientific
peer-reviewed studies, it's a feasible
concept that this could be the case. It
is it is conceivable and it's so the
blueprint for your microbiome doesn't
disappear with that. So you cleanse out
the the population, the blueprint is
there and it can re the body can
reconstruct the the Okay, so it's a jump
start. Jump start a jump start. All
right, fine. I changed my mind on that.
Stripping off a stripping off a layer of
paint and then just it re reevolves
itself to bring a new layer of paint.
It's nice and shiny. So if our microbes
are not important in our gut over
evolution, we'd have got rid of them.
It's like sleep. We are never more
vulnerable than when we're asleep,
right? Yet we've not evolved to do
without sleep. Why haven't we evolved to
do without microbes in our gut? What?
How? How come this? Because they're the
OGs. They're the original life forms on
this planet. They've been here for 4
billion years. You know, three and a
half billion. Can't get more OG than
that. Sure. Three and a half billion
people. Original gut, you know, nicely
done. Thank you. But it's been the most
successful evolutionary development
because every organism today from the
cockroach to the butterfly to humans has
a microbiome, a gut microbiome. Wow.
There there's not a a complex. So there
there's a number I calculated and it
just freaks people out that if you go to
your large intestine and take one
centimeter slice through it, just one
centimeter. One centimeter. That's
4/10en of an inch for those who for
Americans. Americans. America. That's
right. Don't bring any of that metric
crap over here. Talking about America,
boy. You better talk to me in inches.
You know talking about millimeters,
centimeters. that 4/10en of an inch
lives and works more microbes than the
total number of humans who have ever
been born.
Wow. So that we we we think that like
we're in charge. Yeah. But we're just a
darkened anorobic vessel of fecal matter
for microbes. We're an Uber ride. That's
what we are. We're an Uber ride for
microscopic organisms. Microbes.
Yeah. I read something recently in a
book by one of my favorite scientific
authors, Antonio Damasio, um on this
comparison, the early life forms, you
know, which which had a lot of
intelligence. I mean, these microbes on
the planet must have a phenomenal amount
of intelligence collected over three and
a half billion years, but they couldn't
do long division. So
yeah, but but I mean they don't have a
mind and obviously they can do they they
can live in homeostasis with each other
and with the world. Their main benefit
is that they now can connect to our
brains and can influence a much a
conscious entity. But what I mean so
they do have a mind. So if we've got the
original gut microbes, the OGs as we now
like to refer to them, three and a half
billion years, they've invented their
own language. They've got they've had to
have an own their own alphabet of sorts.
So how are they communicating with us
from their little hideyhole in the gut?
You know, they have millions of genes
compared to our, you know, meek number
of 10,00ands. In these genes is stored
all this information how to build these
molecules, how to how to use them. So
their language is basically stored in in
in in their genome. So their own history
of three
and three. No, I was I was about to
swear before I got to the B billions and
billions. Okay. So then when they
settled the first microbes settled in
this floating tubes uh of the first you
know marine animals they interacted with
these floating tubes and there's
something called lateral gene transfer
that they transferred some of these
genes that they had about their language
into these animals and you know fast
forward that was the first version of
the so-called the little brain of the
gut or the interic nervous system and
then with animals developing heads
becoming polar organisms. Some of the
same information about language was
transferred to the brain. What is a
polar organism? Having a head and the
opposite end whatever that is. Okay.
Okay. Yeah. So our language, our ability
to think comes uses the same building
blocks as the microbes developed over
billions of years. I mean that to me is
one of the more fascinating ideas.
Incredibly fascinating. So seeing as how
we have the gut brain connection, seeing
as have microbes have their way of
communicating with us, is this the super
highway that is used for psychedelics?
Because we're ingesting and yet
everything's going off up here in the
brain. Mh. But not so much down in the
gut. So is there sort of exploration?
There are a lot of things going on in
the gut that we don't know yet. like
serotonin plays a big role as as as you
know with the the psychedelic
experiences activating a particular
serotonin receptor the 5H2A receptor
which is in in in the brain. So these
psychedelic experiences seem many of
them seem to be related to that receptor
in in the brain. Now the same receptor
is also in the gut and on microbes and
we don't know what effect um this
actually has but one and it can't be an
accident right it's not an accident it's
a co-evolutionary
thing right okay so is the is the mind
desperate to try and expand and that's
why it's so active to find something
like these psychedelics and then just
whiz them up to the brain yeah I mean
humans have probably used psychedelics
for a long long time a long long time
And based on their experiences initially
by accident that they ingested a
mushroom all of a sudden sort of world
is that the sort of when you talk about
in evolution they just by accident
eating a mushroom is that sort of the
beginning of a stoned ape theory of
evolution phrase stoned ape. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. What is what is the stoned ape? I
mean I've been to the zoo but I've never
seen him you know an ape.
I would love I would just love to sit
there and watch a chimpanzeee tripping
his balls off. I would love that. But I
haven't had the pleasure of seeing.
Well, in out in the wild, I'm guessing
they'll stumble across a mushroom, be
curious, and eat it and go, "Whoa." So,
isn't the basis of where Gary's coming
from? Why do we have receptors for
psychedelics at all, unless it was the
purview of the microbiome that delighted
in it? Yeah, that's a really interesting
question. I I I I can't really answer
it. I can only say partially based on
personal experience. I guess I can say
this here even though it's you know it's
it's it's not I'm not recommending for
people. I am I'm recommending for you to
do it. All right. The the good doctor
here can't I'm letting you know
everybody should do psychedelics. I mean
I can't do it for legal medical legal
reason and sue me please but do it. But
the experience you know that you have
and everybody says this it's it's a
universal human experience. It's not
that one person gets this this this
realization of the interconnectedness of
yourself with the with your environment
the planet like you get a totally
different paradigm. Oh yes. So you Chuck
you Oh god. Yes. You missed a few shows
a few while back because you you I
traveled to Costa Rica to do Iawaska for
an entire week. Wow. And uh I will tell
you that it changed my entire life. It
changed my perspective on everything.
Did you get funnier? Not at all. And
that and you know what? While I was in
my one of my uh while I was in one of my
uh transmeditative states, uh Mother Ya
came to me and said, "I I I can't help
you with the funny son. I'm so sorry."
Okay. So, just to be clear, when you did
this, it was a fully supervised Oh, god.
Yeah. Activity. I you know, they are
licensed. They're fully supervised and
they have medical staff on on hand. It
wasn't somebody who sold you some on the
street. nobody on your back, by the way.
Now, that I do not recommend. I say
please find a professional and have
somebody there to supervise. Make sure
that there's medical staff on hand. Do
not go to somebody's house. Okay? And do
not go to some dude with a ponytail
who's just like, "Dude, I've been a
shaman for like so long now and I would
love to turn you on to the universe."
Yeah. But if he doesn't have a ponytail,
it's okay. And it's and it's not a party
drug. No, it's not. Yeah. If you're
looking to get high, don't do it because
it's not that kind of high. Right. Yeah.
Yeah. So, like one of my speculations is
I mean again partially based on on on
self experience. So there's different
phases to the psychedelic experience.
You there's the the initial you know
rush that you get and with a lot of
visual and auditory experiences but then
it has this long-lasting effect. I mean
at least 24 hours that you notice it if
you pay attention to it was your ability
to communicate and to talk that you've
never talked like this before about
yourself and your emotions and and then
even past that one experience a lot of
people say that one experience just like
you said can have a a lifechanging
effect because from now on you're going
to look at the world differently. So I I
that's easy to understand knowing that
it interferes with brain neurosynapses.
How does that connect back to the gut?
Well, the slow effect, you know, I mean
the thing that what what happens in your
brain initially is a fast response. It's
being absorbed in the small intestine.
Oh, because you ingest it. Yeah. You
ingest it and it's got to get through
your So it only gets to your brain as
the as the microbiome allows it. Right.
True. But it's it's the part that is not
absorbed in your small intestine which
happens immediately after ingestion.
It's the part that goes down to your
colon and then these longerlasting
effects. I would not be surprised if
they're mediated by microbial, you know,
they add things to it when they
stimulate it with the 5HDA 2A receptor.
They produce other molecules that then
create this long-term experience. All
right. Given that there's this
connection, there's so many other
psychological
features of human behavior, some good,
some bad, some failures of our
psychological profile, neurological
diseases, this sort of thing. How much
of that can we blame on our micro biome?
Our current knowledge is pretty much
based on what we call association
studies or correlations. You take a big
population of people that have a
particular diagnosis and then you look
at their gut microbiome and it's
different. You have to even know to do
that as as part of the study, right? But
it doesn't prove causality. That that's
the thing. So I give you a few examples.
I I think uh anxiety
in my opinion I've studied this for for
pretty intensely for the first part of
my career. We know so many mechanisms in
the brain that you know and the effect
of early life adversity that predispose
you to have greater anxiety. So we know
so much about the brain mechanisms that
some people try to propose you know it's
your microbes that cause anxiety. Has
has any of your research gone into diet
relation to Alzheimer's development?
Yes. So we're part of a big um US
European consortium on Alzheimer disease
funded by the NIH. There's definitely
pretty strong evidence that the NIH
National Institute National Institutes
of Health said about that. Thank God.
Thank God we have it. Yeah. Well, thank
God we have it now. What time is it?
What time is it? Let me tell you
something. Now you sound like flavor
flight. Yeah.
And I would say there's there's pretty
solid evidence that again what we call
dispiosis or altered composition of the
gut microbiome plays a role and there
may be heterogeneity you know it's not
ultimacy is not one disease maybe
different pathways
diet and what we now you know is become
sort of the magic word systemic immune
activation or systemic inflammation is
clearly one of the main risk factors for
not just Alzheimer's but also all the
other ones like Parkinson's and but um
Alzheimer's is also it's it's
interesting so anything preventive for
any of these chronic diseases you want
to go to what's been referred to as an
anti-inflammatory diet basically that's
an emergent awareness of our health yeah
is that is that butyrate
anti-inflammatory the phen yeah and
butyrate polyphenols and those sort of
things a large planted
once you have Alzheimer's severe
symptoms there's evidence that a
ketogenic diet you know which in is not
a good diet for the average person
because it starves your microbes but in
that case it's beneficial and there's
one disease entity refractory seizures
in young children where ketogenic diet
is also my god ketogenic is is basically
protein all the time fat and protein fat
and protein Keeping your body in
ketosis, a state of keto, right? Right.
Which means that you don't have access
to sugars or any carbohydrates. Your
body basically uses just the fat. Yeah.
So, and of course presumably before we
were agrarian, our ancestors, they ate
dead animals, right? Or berries, of
course, if they could find them. But,
uh, they were that the caveman diet is
this correct? Well, but you know, going
back to my personal experience on the as
a caveman,
you had to say that. No, it was it was I
was just hanging there. It was just
hanging there. I didn't living with the
Yanomami on the Afarinoa River. I mean,
so they're surrounded by by animals, you
know, by birds, by fish, the big
mammals. They only eat a very small
amount of of of of animal products. They
mainly eat tubers and berries and
plant-based stuff. That's why they have
the healthy microbiome. That's why they
have the healthy microbi and and that
has been studied all the way a colleague
of mine at UCLA Ela Sha all the way into
the production of neurotrans of GABA
this inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
brain on a ketogenic diet that's sort of
like Valium you know it it sort of tuned
tones down the nervous system. How how
much of this is us really knowing a lot
of it or how much of this is us just
beginning to understand? I know you've
been doing this research for decades,
but just how much more of this do we not
know yet? What can we look forward to?
Yeah. I I think we're just scratching on
the surface surface. Oh, really? Yeah. I
think Well, I was just think about these
millions of of genes that the microbes
have. We we only know why do they have
more genes than we do? That ain't right.
Yeah. Been around a little bit longer.
or or is it the collection of genes
represented in the diversity of microbes
that you're referring to as millions of
genes? Okay. So, if someone prepping for
a colonoscopy, they just got rid of the
entire population of microbes. So, why
other than the value of the exam to
prevent colon cancer? How do you get
back your microbiome if it's all in the
toilet? It comes back fairly quickly.
You know, it I I would say where's the
recipe? Wait, who's who? Oh, the So, so
the blueprints to reassemble it is in
your gun inside. But don't I'm asking
the medical doctor here. Well, I'm
telling you.
Did I ask the two of you? No. But you
got it anyway.
Yeah. So, you need to know. So, okay.
So, you're saying we we are chemically
equipped to reproduce the
microbiome that is suitable for us. So
there's a form of colitis or a very
serious form after antibiotics where you
basically just destroy your microbiome.
Yeah. Um Oh. Because the antibiotics
while it's getting rid of whatever was
your condition, it's it's it's biotics.
Killing everything. So it's called
cedhicial colitis. That's that that's
the So one therapy that is very
effective is a feal micro transplant.
It's the only disease where that works.
A poop transplant. It's a poop
transplant. So whose poop are you
taking? Oh, you had to ask. Uh, I'll
tell you this, not dog poop.
No. So, there's now people have
identified donors that are free of any
disease, any family history of disease.
So, and that have a diverse healthy
microbiome. So, these are the donors.
So, one of the most effective therapies
is to get one of these transplants,
these poop transplants. And so, for a
while, then the person who got this
transplant has the microbial composition
of the donor. Yes. because he he or she
himself didn't have it. But if you look
at this like a few weeks later, a few
months later, the person's own
microbiome is being reassembled.
And the reason is possible because the
microbes are not just floating inside
the lumen, the inside of the gut, but
they also inhabit the mucosal lining.
And that's probably where that
information is stored of the blueprints.
And that's exactly what comes back.
Yeah, I did say that earlier, but that's
okay.
That's I you know I don't need to be
right. I just need to be funny.
But if you're right and funny I guess
right. So what about advertisements for
gut ailments? And every time I see one
say do I have that or could that happen
to me? And one of them shows up a a lot
is IBS or irritable bowel syndrome. Do
we know the cause of that? And can gut
health fix that? Yeah. So yeah, this is
something that myself and my group have
studied for, you know, like I would say
four four decades. You're failing badly
because people still have it. Get back
to work. What are you doing here? Well,
fortunately, finally, after 30 years of,
you know, writing articles and review
articles on it, it's basically called a
a disorder of altered gut brain
interactions. They did bring the brain
in. How about finally? And it's the most
effective therapies are brain targeted
therapies, meaning simple relaxation
techniques, mindfulness-based stress
reduction, gut directed hypnosis,
cognitive behavioral therapy. They're
better, more effective than any of these
medications. Now he's getting all newagy
on this. So how is this received by
quote western medicine? Yeah. To have
these a lot of resistance and also the
pharmaceutical industry. Of course, you
need a pill. They need a pill. They need
a pill. Yeah.
You can't meditate a pill. So, you've
got I mean, we're getting inundated with
supplements. We're getting inundated
with probiotics. I mean, probiotics,
too. There's all these, you know, eat
this yogurt cuz it's got the the the the
basillus, the the active microbes. Do we
really need that? So the official
organization of gastronology has
published, you know, they always publish
these these statements, these uh expert
statements and they said there's not
good enough scientific evidence to
actually recommend probiotics in general
as a treatment for IBS. However, there
are patients, you know, who benefit and
there's also there's different types of
probiotics if if now go on the internet,
you know. Yeah. Yeah. It's a whole
industry. Yeah. That's the whole
industry. And like when I wrote my book,
somebody came to me who was a retired um
Ulip Packard engineer who said, "You
want to be my partner? I want to start a
probiotic company." So we so we just go
to these big warehouses and get our
organisms and then we package them and
then you know market them. So that's a
lot of people have have and you said no
and he's a billionaire now. Is that what
you're saying? I have not seen him since
then. I don't know. All right. So,
there's a lot on the table right now and
and we're inundated by ads that are
telling us one thing or another about
medicines that are being put forth. What
would you say is a best practice going
forward? Not that you're prescribing for
an audience that is surely diverse, but
what kind of things should we be aware
of as we put food in our pie hole?
I love that. Just a glimpse on your
diet.
So don't judge me cuz I like pie. So
first of all, I would say it's not just
the food, you know, it's the lifestyle.
It's the food is a big part of
lifestyle. Same with the Mediterranean
diet. I never I I I no longer call it
the Mediterranean diet, but the
Mediterranean lifestyle. If you go to
Italy in summer, you will experience
that the social interactions and the uh
which is a big part of it, you know,
like all this go
back around go back further than that to
the soil where our plants come from and
that the animals eat that then it comes
down the food chain to us. Yeah. So like
the awareness of of of why your gut
health may not be optimal is key to
start out with because then you realize
it's not just it's not just what you eat
but where it's grown and how it's grown
and how do you eat it in which context
and you know that's easy to say but
suppose I don't care about any of that
and I do poop regularly
what is what should I be worried about
and I don't have mood swings I don't
have IBS so does that make me rare on
this spectrum of gut biome issues. It
seems right now, you know, all of a
sudden since this has become acceptable
as a topic for dinner parties, which
which was not the case even 10 years
ago, it seems like everybody now has,
you know, like 40 or 60% of the
population has some kind of a a poor gut
health, you know. I'm not sure if that's
true or not, but wait, but the people
you studied, you said they have the best
gut health in the world. What is it
about them that manifests this fact? Do
they live longer? Are there they never
have diarrhea or constipation? What is
the metric for you to arrive at that
conclusion? You know, for these people,
um because we should just do what they
do if that's what you're saying. If if
you lived with them, you would realize
we can't we can't go back, you know.
There's no there's no way there's no
cable. There's no streaming. I'm not
eating leaves and grubs and grubs. Yeah.
Tasty grubs. They're tasty. But what we
know about them is, you know, so they
have an interesting thing. They they
have a lot of little wars and the wars
are invading another village to get
women from other villages and they do
this to prevent uh inbreeding, you know.
So this is part of their culture that
they always they could just have a
dance, you know, just hey everybody
social. Yeah, just come on over here.
We're going to have a little dance.
Y'all meet one another and you know.
Anyway, so sorry. Um, so a lot of them
die early because they get bitten by a
snake or eaten by a crocodile or a lot
of good that the the healthy gut biome
did for them. But but if they don't have
but that crocodile has the healthiest
gut of all the crocodiles. Yes. And
that's why crocodiles smile. But here
comes the interesting part. If they
don't die early from one of these
accidents, they live into their 80s
without any medication. With no
medication. No medication. And no and no
medical system. And no medical system.
That is impressive. And no medical
insurance or anything. We don't need it.
Well, we don't have that here either.
So, let's be honest. This is America. We
do not have healthcare. All right. It's
an illusion. People, don't get mad at
me. Vote differently. Okay. All right.
So, you've spoken of a mixture of
traditional western medicine and
lifestyle, a diet, uh even sort of
eastern philosophies and ways of living.
Is there a way to sift the fact from the
fiction for someone who's just exposed
to all these ads and and other YouTube
videos? Someone seeking guidance and not
being inundated with all of this
misinformation. Thank you. Very
difficult for the for the average
person. Very difficult, especially in
today's media climate. And it's going to
get worse, you know, for political
reasons. I think we're going Listen,
don't blame me. I'm very healthy. I have
a doctor who said that I have am the
best health that anybody could ever be.
You know it and I know it. So healthy.
It's what I am. Yeah. One of my missions
at this stage of my career is really to
provide that answer for people and the
trust and the transparency. I think
there always has to be this always has
to be evidence supported and the
evidence could come from scientific
studies high quality not you know five
mice and then claim that this is but it
also can come from um traditional
success if I I have this develop this
criteria somebody is stuck around for
five or six thousand years there's got
to be something to it you know you
cannot you cannot just dismiss it
turmeric is a good example so true
anti-inflammatory. There's now
scientific studies. Jinseng is another.
So there's there's several things that I
think you can but then there's obviously
in in in the middle of all of this is an
enormous number of stuff that's placebo.
And placebo is not a bad thing if if
people feel better and they want to
spend the money. People poo poo. I
shouldn't use that phrase. You know,
people denigrate placeos, but if it
works, we should study placeos. Yeah.
And so there's a lot of you know high
high quality research on the place on
the brain's mechanism to that gut brain
connection the placebo if your brain
perceives that it's working. Yeah. So
the placebo is a
evidence-based therapy that the body
does itself. You know it's not it's the
enemy of the pharmaceutical industry
obviously that's why it's badmouth. It's
it's a wonderful thing if if you're a
really good doctor and healer, you
utilize the placebo response
extensively.
Interesting, isn't that? That is that's
pretty wild, man. Yeah. So, doctor, what
what brings you to New York City? It
wasn't just to do this show with us. So,
I have an invitation to this um
integrative health symposium that's
going on uh
tomorrow and into and and to Saturday
and I have a couple of one panel on IBS
and and one talk about um increased
stress responsiveness of people. Okay.
Especially stress is a buzz word, a
killer of of late. Yeah, we're all
stressed. Well, cortisol and stress very
uh inadvertably linked. So, well,
welcome to the town. Yeah. And uh thanks
for making some time in your schedule.
And speaking of gut biome, don't eat any
dirty dogs. Okay. Hot dogs. Yeah, man.
Oh, no. That No, you need that. Yeah.
You know, you got the guy with the You
got to live here. See, the people who
eat it every day Oh, they're they're not
from here and do it. It'll kill you.
Okay. Yeah. We We built up a resistance.
They'll kill you within the hour, right?
But you go to the one with the dirtiest
fingernails. That's what you do. That's
the best one. That's the guy. Don't look
at me like that. Thanks Neil and team.
It was a pleasure to be here. Pleasure
was us sir. You guys are an amazing
team. I know we've done a lot of podcast
but not not there's not too many out
like this. Dr. Emmeran Mayor with a 2016
book Mind and Gut Connection followed
six years later by Mind and Gut immune
immune connection. Nice. All right. It's
all there and more. Gary, thanks for
being here. Pleasure. All right, Chuck.
My stomach hurts.
[Laughter]
Well, go talk to your gut and see see
what happens. I My gut is feeling just
fine. Good to know. Thank you. So, this
has been Star Talk special edition. Neil
deGrasse Tyson here as always, bidding
you to keep looking up.
[Music]